1. What is tree shaking and why is it important in React applications?
Tree shaking is a build optimization technique that removes unused or dead code from the final JavaScript bundle. 
In React applications, bundlers such as Webpack, Rollup, and Vite analyze ES module imports and exclude exports that are never used. 
This results in smaller bundle sizes, faster download times, quicker JavaScript execution, and improved application performance, Improved Lighthouse and Core Web Vitals Scores.
 Most modern React build tools such as Vite, Rollup, Webpack, Turbopack, and esbuild perform tree shaking during production builds.

Ex:
// utils.js
export function add(a, b) {
  return a + b;
}

export function subtract(a, b) {
  return a - b;
}

export function multiply(a, b) {
  return a * b;
}

React Component:
import { add } from "./utils";
console.log(add(2, 3));
After tree shaking, only the add function is included in the production bundle. The subtract and multiply functions are removed because they are never used.

2. How does tree shaking work internally?
- Builds a dependency graph of all modules starting from the application's entry point.
- Analyzes ES Module imports/exports (import/export) using static analysis.
- Marks all used exports that are reachable from the entry point.
- Identifies unused exports (dead code) that are never imported or referenced.
- Removes unused code from the final bundle during the build process.
- Preserves modules with side effects (e.g., console.log(), global variable modifications) to avoid breaking functionality.
- Runs dead code elimination and minification (using tools like Terser) to further optimize the bundle.
- Generates a smaller production bundle, resulting in faster load times and better performance.

What Happens During a React Production Build? - This is important
npm run build - 
React Source Code
        │
        ▼
ES Module Analysis
        │
        ▼
Dependency Graph Creation
        │
        ▼
Tree Shaking
        │
        ▼
Dead Code Elimination
        │
        ▼
Minification
        │
        ▼
Optimized Bundle

3. Why does tree shaking not work well with CommonJS (require)?
Tree shaking relies on static analysis, but CommonJS imports are resolved dynamically at runtime, making it difficult for bundlers to determine which code is actually used.
Bundlers cannot reliably determine which exports will be used, whereas ES Modules use static import/export syntax that can be analyzed during the build process. 
Since the bundler cannot safely remove unused CommonJS code, it often includes the entire module, reducing tree-shaking effectiveness.
CommonJS uses require(), which is dynamic. Modules can be loaded conditionally, the module path can be computed at runtime, exports can be modified, and properties 
can be accessed dynamically (for example, math[fn]). Because the bundler cannot always determine which exports will be used during execution, 
it must conservatively include more code. 
That's why tree shaking is much more effective with ES Modules than with CommonJS.


4. What coding patterns can break Tree Shaking?
- CommonJS (require) imports, because they are resolved dynamically at runtime and cannot be statically analyzed.

- Dynamic imports or dynamic property access, such as:
utils[functionName] - The bundler cannot determine which code is actually used.

- Modules with side effects, such as:
console.log("Module loaded"); - Bundlers keep these modules to avoid changing application behavior.

- Namespace imports (import *), which can make it harder to eliminate unused code.
- Wildcard exports (export *) across multiple files, which can complicate dependency analysis.
-  Dynamic require() statements, such as:
require('./' + moduleName);

Tree shaking can break when code cannot be statically analyzed, such as with CommonJS require, dynamic imports/access patterns, side effects, namespace imports, 
and wildcard exports. In these cases, bundlers cannot safely determine unused code and may include more code in the final bundle.

5. What is a bundler and why does React need one?
A bundler is a tool that analyzes an application's dependency graph and combines source files into optimized bundles for the browser. 
React needs a bundler because browsers don't understand JSX or modern JavaScript directly. Bundlers handle transpilation, module resolution, tree shaking, 
code splitting, minification, and asset optimization, resulting in a smaller and faster production build.

Because React needs this:

✅ Module Resolution - The process of finding the actual file/package for an import statement.
✅ Dependency Graph Creation – Understands relationships between modules.
App.js
├── Header.js
│   └── Logo.js
└── Footer.js
✅ JSX/TypeScript Transpilation – Converts code into browser-compatible JavaScript.
✅ Tree Shaking – Removes unused code.
✅ Code Splitting – Loads code only when needed.
✅ Minification – Reduces JavaScript and CSS size.
✅ Asset Optimization – Optimizes images, fonts, CSS, and other static assets.
✅ Bundling – Combines files into optimized chunks.
✅ Webpack / Vite / Rollup

6. How is Vite different from Webpack in development mode?

Webpack Dev  → Bundle Everything
Webpack Build → Bundle Everything

Vite Dev    → ESM + esbuild
Vite Build  → Rollup

Vite Dev  → ESM + esbuild
Vite Build → Rollup

Webpack bundles first and then serves, while Vite serves first and bundles only for production. 🚀
1000 Files
    ↓
Bundle Everything
    ↓
Start Application 
So startup may take a few seconds for large projects.
In development mode, Webpack bundles the entire application before serving it, 

whereas Vite leverages native ES Modules and serves source files directly without upfront bundling. 
This allows Vite to have significantly faster startup times and near-instant Hot Module Replacement, making development faster, especially for large React applications. 
I won't bundle everything now. I'll start immediately and send files only when the browser asks for them.
Start Dev Server
       ↓
Browser asks for App.jsx
       ↓
Vite sends App.jsx

Browser asks for Header.jsx
       ↓
Vite sends Header.jsx

Webpack ex:
File Change Example

I changed Header.jsx
Header Changed
      ↓
Rebuild Bundle
      ↓
Update Browser

Vite:
Header Changed
      ↓
Send Only Header.jsx
      ↓
Update Browser

7. What happens differently in development and production builds?
Development Build

Source maps enabled for debugging
Readable/unminified code
HMR (Hot Module Replacement)
Detailed error messages
Minimal optimizations

Production Build

Tree shaking removes unused code
Minification reduces file size
Code splitting for better loading
Asset optimization
Hashed filenames for caching
Dead code elimination

In development, you get faster feedback while coding, but the app may run slower and look less like the final deployed version.

In production, the app behaves more like what real users see, with better load times and less extra overhead

8. What is code splitting and how do bundlers enable it?
Code splitting is the process of breaking an application into smaller bundles that can be loaded on demand. 
Bundlers such as Webpack and Vite enable this by analyzing the dependency graph and creating separate chunks, often through dynamic imports. 
This reduces the initial bundle size and improves application loading performance.

Bundlers like Webpack, Rollup, and Vite analyze the dependency graph and create separate chunks.
Using Dynamic Imports: const Dashboard = React.lazy(() => import('./Dashboard'));
Bundler generates -> main.js, dashboard.chunk.js

9. How does client-side routing work in React without page reloads?
React client-side routing works by using React Router and the browser's History API. When a user navigates, React Router intercepts the request, 
updates the URL without a full page reload, and renders the appropriate component based on the route. This provides a faster and smoother user experience

Behind the scenes, React Router internally calls the browser's History API (pushState/replaceState) for you.
Understanding:
navigate("/dashboard");
React Router essentially does something similar to:
window.history.pushState({}, "", "/dashboard");Show more lines




